This is a draft. Don't read it yet :)

Apple switched to AFPS for their machines. AFPS is a copy on write filesystem.  
This has possible technical implications. 

- Backing up to another AFPS destination could offer huge performance improvements. We could see potentially instant Snapshots like we see in ZFS.
- In the beginning of AFPS there were lots of reports about how HDD will perform very poor and AFPS is only suitable for SSDs. It is unclear to me if this was just an intial performance bug or if this has to do with SMR drives behaving poorly with CoW. 

So lets find out. To have a comparison, I want to run multiple test. First is the inital backup time. This isn't really important IMHO, since this is only done once. Second run is a second run without any changes.  
This is a pretty important metric, since this simulates the normal behavior of your daily usage. TimeMachine backups every hour, so this metric is pretty important.  
The third run is with the disk being 90% full. For that I will fill up the drive with dd until the used capacity reaches 90%. This is because some SSDs have some kind of pseudo SLC cache and some SMR HDDs in compination with CoW suffer when not having free space.  
With that third test we get a more realistic result of how TimeMachine will behave a year down the road when the backup got filled. What this test won't show is how fragmentation effects performance.
I don't know of a good way to simulate fragmentation and I am also not sure if that even is a big issue for TimeMachine or if it mostly writes sequential. Just like with ZFS there are no tools to defrag AFPS.  
In all these test, I will wait 60mins between test. The reason for that is that SSDs and HDDs sometimes to some interal work to speed things up. In real life we also have 60min between backups where the disks have nothing else to do. 
For good measure I will throw in my current setup that backups over SMB to a NAS.  
All tests will be run with a encrypted TimeMachine setup.  


Sytem to back up:  
macMini with a 500GB SSD. The data to backup is roughly 180GB. macOS is 15.4.1

Old TimeMachine setup:  
My old setup was a TimeMachine backup my TrueNAS system over 10GBit/s SMB. The TrueNAS system has a 48TB pool (8 drives in a RAIDZ2 and special vdev mirror for metadata performance). 
Inital backup time -> unknown
Second run without any changes -> 20min
Third run with a 90% full disk -> can't simulate that
conclusion -> I don't know why it takes so long. SMB is a complicated beast, maybe there are some bottlenecks there. TrueNAS shows no CPU usage, no disk busy nothing. Same goes for the macMini.  
So I don't know where the bottleneck is, I just know it is very slow but also easy on the system. 

HDD:  
Lacie Porsche Design 2TB SSD 2,5" HDD with USB 3.0.
Inital backup time -> 21min
Second run without any changes -> 
Third run with a 90% full disk -> 
conclusion -> 

SSD:  
Kingston XS1000 1TB SSD with USB 3.0 
Inital backup time -> 6min 27s
Second run without any changes -> 
Third run with a 90% full disk -> 
conclusion -> 
